Add Storyblok guide (#1944)
withastro/docs: src/pages/en/guides/cms/storyblok.md

---
title: Storyblok & Astro
description: Add content to your Astro project using Storyblok as a CMS
layout: ~/layouts/CMSLayout.astro
setup: |
    import PackageManagerTabs from '~/components/tabs/PackageManagerTabs.astro'

> stub: true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stub: false
```

### Prerequisites

To get started, you will need to have the following:

1. **An Astro project** - If you don't have an Astro project yet, our [Installation guide](/en/install/auto/) will get you up and running in no time.

2. **A Storyblok account and space** - If you don't have an account yet, [sign up for free](https://app.storyblok.com/#/signup) and create a new space.

3. **Storyblok API tokens** - You can find and generate your API tokens in the Access Tokens tab of your Storyblok space settings. 
    - **Preview token** - This token will be used in development to fetch drafts or unpublished versions of your content.
    - **Public token** - This token will be used in production builds to fetch only published content.

### Setting up credentials

To add your Storyblok credentials to Astro, create a `.env` file in the root of your project with the following variables:

```ini title=".env"
STORYBLOK_PREVIEW_TOKEN=YOUR_PREVIEW_TOKEN
STORYBLOK_PUBLIC_TOKEN=YOUR_PUBLIC_TOKEN
```

Now, you should be able to use these environment variables in your project.

> Your root directory should now include these new files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your root directory should now include this new file:
```

In this example, we have a `blogPost` Blok content type in our Storyblok library with the following fields:

- `title` - A text field
- `description` - A text field
- `content` - A rich text field

Our goal is to create the equivalent Astro component that will use these fields to render its content. To do this, create a new file named `BlogPost.astro` inside `src/storyblok` with the following content:

```astro title="src/storyblok/BlogPost.astro"
---
import { storyblokEditable, renderRichText } from '@storyblok/astro'

const { blok } = Astro.props
const content = renderRichText(blok.content)
---

<article {...storyblokEditable(blok)}>
  <h1>{blok.title}</h1>
  <p>{blok.description}</p>
  <Fragment set:html={content} />
</article>
```

The `blok` property contains the data that we will receive from Storyblok. It contains the values of the fields that we defined in the `blogPost` Blok in Storyblok.

To render our content, the integration provides utility functions such as:

- `storyblokEditable` - it adds the necessary attributes to the elements so that you can edit them in Storyblok.
- `renderRichText` - it transforms the rich text field into HTML.

> Your root directory should include these new files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your root directory should include this new file:
```

```ini title="Project Structure" ins={3}
├── src/
│   └── storyblok/
│       └── BlogPost.astro
├── .env
├── astro.config.mjs
└── package.json
```

> Finally, to connect the `blogPost` Blok to the `BlogPost` component, add a new property to your components object in your Astro config file. The key is the name of the blok and the value is the path to the component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, to connect the `blogPost` Blok to the `BlogPost` component, add a new property to your components object in your Astro config file. The key is the name of the Blok and the value is the path to the component.
```

const storyblokApi = useStoryblokApi()

const { data } = await storyblokApi.get("cdn/stories/test-post", {
  version: import.meta.env.DEV ? "draft" : "published",
});

const content = data.story.content;
---
<StoryblokComponent blok={content} />
```

To query our data, we will use the `useStoryblokApi` hook. This will initialize a new client instance using our integration configuration.

To render our content, pass the `content` property of the Story to the `StoryblokComponent` as `blok`. This component will render the Bloks that are defined inside the `content` property. In our case, it will render the `BlogPost` component.

## Making a blog with Astro and Storyblok

With the integration set up, we can now create a blog with Astro and Storyblok.

### Prerequisites

1. **A Storyblok space** - For this tutorial, we recommend using a new space. If you already have a space with Bloks, feel free to use them, but you will need to modify the code to match the Blok names and content types.

2. **An Astro project integraded with Storyblok** - See [integrating with Astro](#integrating-with-astro) for instructions on how to set up the integration.

### Creating a blok library

> To create Bloks, go to the Storyblok app and click on the **Block Library** tab. Click on <kbd>+ New blok</kbd> button and create the following Bloks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create Bloks, go to the Storyblok app and click on the **Block Library** tab. Click on the <kbd>+ New blok</kbd> button and create the following Bloks:
```

## Making a blog with Astro and Storyblok

With the integration set up, we can now create a blog with Astro and Storyblok.

### Prerequisites

1. A Storyblok space - For this tutorial, we recommend using a new space. If you already have a space with bloks, feel free to use them, but you will need to modify the code to match the blok names and content types.

2. An Astro project integraded with Storyblok - See [integrating with Astro](#integrating-with-astro) for instructions on how to set up the integration.

### Creating a blok library

To create bloks, go to the Storyblok app and click on the **Block Library** tab. Click on <kbd>+ New blok</kbd> button and create the following bloks:

1. `blogPost` - A content type blok with the following fields:
    - `title` - A text field
    - `description` - A text field
    - `content` - A rich text field

2. `blogPostList` - An empty nestable blok

3. `page` - A content type blok with the following fields:
    - `body` - A nestable blok

### Creating content

> Using the blok library that we created in the previous step, create the following content:

Author: there is one of them that is not a Story one is just a folder to group blog stories.

> Using the blok library that we created in the previous step, create the following content:

Author: we had the same idea 😆

2. `blog` - A folder to store our blog posts in.

3. `blog/no-javascript` - A story with the `blogPost` content type.
    ```yaml
    title: No JavaScript
    description: A sample blog post
    content: Hi there! This blog post doesn't use JavaScript.
    ```
3. `blog/astro-is-amazing` - A story with the `blogPost` content type.
    ```yaml
    title: Astro is amazing
    description: We love Astro
    content: Hi there! This blog post was build with Astro.
    ```

Now that we have our content ready, we can switch to our Astro project and start building our blog.

### Connecting bloks to components

To connect your newly created bloks to Astro components, create a new folder named `storyblok` in your `src` directory and add the following files:

```astro title="src/storyblok/Page.astro"
---
import { storyblokEditable } from '@storyblok/astro'
import StoryblokComponent from '@storyblok/astro/StoryblokComponent.astro'
const { blok } = Astro.props
---

<main {...storyblokEditable(blok)}>
  {
    blok.body?.map((blok) => {
      return <StoryblokComponent blok={blok} />
    })
  }
</main>

> ```

Author: changed in 286977a07031c54a2d7c4632f9faaf8aa3c30ef7

> `Page.astro` is a nested component that will recursively render all the bloks inside the `body` property of the `page` blok. It also adds the `storyblokEditable` directive to the parent element which will allow us to edit the page in Storyblok.

Author: 👀😆

> `Page.astro` is a nested component that will recursively render all the bloks inside the `body` property of the `page` blok. It also adds the `storyblokEditable` directive to the parent element which will allow us to edit the page in Storyblok.

Author: nested component refers to a `Blok` inside a `Blok`. they call them nestable

> `Page.astro` is a nested component that will recursively render all the bloks inside the `body` property of the `page` blok. It also adds the `storyblokEditable` directive to the parent element which will allow us to edit the page in Storyblok.

Reviewer 2: Gotcha, I was just wondering if it would be confusing to call the `.astro` component a nested component if that was a Storyblok thing. e.g. `Page.astro` _represents_ a nested component.

```astro title="src/storyblok/BlogPost.astro"
---
import { storyblokEditable, renderRichText } from '@storyblok/astro'
const { blok } = Astro.props
---
<article {...storyblokEditable(blok)}>
  <h1>{blok.title}</h1>
  <p>{blok.description}</p>
  <Fragment set:html={renderRichText(blok.content)} />

> </article>

Author: I think I rename the content type from `body` to `content`.

```

`BlogPost.astro` is a content type component that will render the `title`, `description` and `content` properties of the `blogPost` blok. It also adds the `storyblokEditable` directive to the parent element which will allow us to edit the blog post in Storyblok. 

To transform the `content` property from a rich text field to HTML, we use the `renderRichText` function.

```astro title="src/pages/blogPostList.astro"
---
import { useStoryblokApi } from '@storyblok/astro'

const storyblokApi = useStoryblokApi();
const { data } = await storyblokApi.get('cdn/stories', {
  version: import.meta.env.DEV ? "draft" : "published",
  content_type: 'blogPost',
})
const posts = data.stories.map(story => {
  return {
    title: story.content.title,
    date: new Date(story.published_at).toLocaleDateString("en-US", {dateStyle: "full"}),
    description: story.content.description,
    slug: story.full_slug,
  }
})
const { blok } = Astro.props
---
<h1>My blog</h1>
<ul>
  {posts.map(post => (
    <li>
      <time>{post.date}</time>
      <a href={post.slug}>{post.title}</a>
      <p>{post.description}</p>
    </li>
  ))}
</ul>
```

> `BlogPostList.astro` is a nestable component that will render a list of blog posts previews. 

Author: I am not sure about removing the nestable component. I added this to help users identify which Blok type they are working with.

> `BlogPostList.astro` is a nestable component that will render a list of blog posts previews. 

Reviewer 2: That makes sense, I laid out my thought process above but let's keep it in!

> `BlogPostList.astro` is a nestable component that will render a list of blog posts previews. 

Author: I expanded this section to reflect what I actually meant

#### Static site generation

If you are using Astro's default static site generation, you will use the [dynamic routes](/en/core-concepts/routing/#dynamic-routes) and the `getStaticPaths` function to generate your project pages .

Create a new file in the `src/pages` directory called `[...slug].astro` and add the following code:

```astro title="src/pages/[...slug].astro"
---
import { useStoryblokApi } from '@storyblok/astro'
import StoryblokComponent from '@storyblok/astro/StoryblokComponent.astro'
import BaseLayout from '../layouts/BaseLayout.astro'

export async function getStaticPaths() {
  const storyblokApi = useStoryblokApi()
  const { data } = await storyblokApi.get("cdn/stories", {
    version: import.meta.env.DEV ? "draft" : "published",
  });
  const pages = data.stories.map(story => {
    return {
      params: {
        slug: story.full_slug === 'home' ? undefined : story.full_slug
      },
      props: {
        content: story.content
      }
    }
  })
  return pages
}
const { content } = Astro.props
---
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>Storyblok and Astro</title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <StoryblokComponent blok={content} />
  </body>
</html>
```

> This file will generate a page for each story in Storyblok. It uses the `useStoryblokApi` hook to fetch all the stories and the `version` query parameter to fetch the draft version of the stories when in development mode and the published version when in building for production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This file will generate a page for each story, with the slug and content fetched from the Storyblok API. If the story's slug is `home`, we return an undefined slug, which generates the `/` route.
```
We don't have to repeat how the hook and query parameter works after we mentioned it earlier

#### Server-side rendering

If you’ve [opted in to SSR mode](/en/guides/server-side-rendering/#enabling-ssr-in-your-project), you will use a dynamic route that uses a slug parameter to fetch the page data from Storyblok.

```astro title="src/pages/[...slug].astro"
---
import { useStoryblokApi } from '@storyblok/astro'
import StoryblokComponent from '@storyblok/astro/StoryblokComponent.astro'

> import BaseLayout from '../layouts/BaseLayout.astro'
> 
> const storyblokApi = useStoryblokApi()
> const slug = Astro.params.slug === undefined ? "home" : Astro.params.slug
> let content;
> try {
>   const { data } = await storyblokApi.get(`cdn/stories/${slug}`, {
>     version: import.meta.env.DEV ? "draft" : "published",
>   });
>   content = data.story.content
> } catch (error) {
>   return Astro.redirect('/404')
> }
> ---
> <BaseLayout>
>   <StoryblokComponent blok={content} />
> </BaseLayout>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const storyblokApi = useStoryblokApi()
const slug = Astro.params.slug === undefined ? "home" : Astro.params.slug
let content;
try {
  const { data } = await storyblokApi.get(`cdn/stories/${slug}`, {
    version: import.meta.env.DEV ? "draft" : "published",
  });
  content = data.story.content
} catch (error) {
  return Astro.redirect('/404')
}
---
<StoryblokComponent blok={content} />
```
Removing BaseLayout to match the other example

```

> This file will fetch the page data from Storyblok and render the page. It uses the `useStoryblokApi` hook to fetch the story and the `version` query parameter to fetch the draft version of the story when in development mode and the published version when in building for production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This file will fetch and render the page data from Storyblok that matches the dynamic `slug` parameter.
```

### Publishing your site

To deploy your website, visit our [deployment guides](/en/guides/deploy/) and follow the instructions for your preferred hosting provider. 

#### Rebuild on Storyblok changes

If your project is using Astro's default static mode, you will need to set up a webhook to trigger a new build when your content changes. If you are using Netlify or Vercel as your hosting provider, you can use its webhook feature to trigger a new build from Storyblok events. 

##### Netlify

To set up a webhook in Netlify:

1. Go to your site dashboard and click on **Build & deploy**. 

2. Under the **Continuous Deployment** tab, find the **Build hooks** section and click on **Add build hook**. 

3. Provide a name for your webhook and select the branch you want to trigger the build on. Click on **Save** and copy the generated URL.

##### Vercel

To set up a webhook in Vercel:

1. Go to your project dashboard and click on **Settings**. 

2. Under the **Git** tab, find the **Deploy Hooks** section. 

3. Provide a name for your webhook and the branch you want to trigger the build on. Click **Add** and copy the generated URL.

##### Adding a webhook to Storyblok

> In your Storyblok space **settings**, click on the **Webhooks** tab. Paste the webhook URL you copied in the previous section. Finally, hit <kbd>Save</kbd> to create the webhook.

Author: my bad forgot to add which box. this is correct thanks Dan 😇

> Now, whenever you publish a new blog post in Contentful, a new build will be triggered and your blog will be updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, whenever you publish a new story, a new build will be triggered and your blog will be updated.
```

---
import { storyblokEditable, renderRichText } from '@storyblok/astro'

const { blok } = Astro.props
const content = renderRichText(blok.body)
---

<article {...storyblokEditable(blok)}>
  <h1>{blok.title}</h1>
  <p>{blok.description}</p>
  <Fragment set:html={content} />
</article>
```

The integration provides utility functions to help you render your content. `storyblokEditable` will enable the Storyblok editor to edit your content and `renderRichText` will render your rich text content to HTML.

Finally add the `BlogPost` component to your Astro config file:

```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={15}
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import storyblok from '@storyblok/astro';
import { loadEnv } from 'vite';

const env = loadEnv(import.meta.env.MODE, process.cwd(), 'STORYBLOK');

export default defineConfig({
  integrations: [
    storyblok({
      accessToken:
        import.meta.env.MODE === 'development'
          ? env.STORYBLOK_PREVIEW_TOKEN
          : env.STORYBLOK_PUBLIC_TOKEN,
      components: {
        blogPost: 'storyblok/BlogPost',
      },
      apiOptions: { 
        region: 'us',
      },
    })
  ],
});
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I'm hesitant to leave the reader at a point where they can't see anything on the screen (unless that happens early in the "Making a blog" section). What do you think about introducing `<StoryblokComponent />` in this section in the simplest possible way?

```suggestion
To test the setup, you can create a new story with the `blogPost` content type, and fetch and render it directly:

```astro title="pages/test.astro" {8,12}
---
import { useStoryblokApi } from '@storyblok/astro'
import StoryblokComponent from '@storyblok/astro/StoryblokComponent.astro'

const storyblokApi = useStoryblokApi()

const { data } = await storyblokApi.get("cdn/stories/test-post", { version: "draft" });

const content = data.story.content;
---
<StoryblokComponent blok={content} />
```

The `<StoryblokComponent />` references your registered components to render the right one.
```

Reviewer 2: couldn't get the backticks trick to save this 😔

Author: I think it's a great idea. I will commit to this to see the difference, thank you Dan!

- `storyblokEditable` - it adds the necessary attributes to the elements so that you can edit them in Storyblok.
- `renderRichText` - it transforms the rich text field into HTML.

Your root directory should include these new files:

```ini title="Project Structure" ins={3}
├── src/
│   └── storyblok/
│       └── BlogPost.astro
├── .env
├── astro.config.mjs
└── package.json
```

Finally, to connect the `blogPost` blok to the `BlogPost` component, add a new property to your components object in your Astro config file. The key is the name of the blok and the value is the path to the component.

```js title="astro.config.mjs" ins={15}
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import storyblok from '@storyblok/astro';
import { loadEnv } from 'vite';

const env = loadEnv(import.meta.env.MODE, process.cwd(), 'STORYBLOK');

export default defineConfig({
  integrations: [
    storyblok({
      accessToken:
        import.meta.env.MODE === 'development'
          ? env.STORYBLOK_PREVIEW_TOKEN
          : env.STORYBLOK_PUBLIC_TOKEN,
      components: {
        blogPost: 'storyblok/BlogPost',
      },
      apiOptions: { 
        region: 'us',
      },
    })
  ],
});
```

> To test the setup, create a new story with the `blogPost` content type. Then fetch and render your story directly into a page:

Author: maybe we can label this small section as fetching data? What do you think @Jutanium ?
```suggestion
### Fetching data

To test the setup, create a new story with the `blogPost` content type. Then fetch and render your story directly into a page:
```

Reviewer 2: I agree, since it's no longer about connecting components!

The Storyblok integration requires an object with the following properties:

> 1. `accessToken` - This are the Storyblok API tokens that we added in the previous step. We will use the preview token in development and the public token in production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `accessToken` - This references the Storyblok API tokens that we added in the previous step. We will use the preview token in development and the public token in production.
```

    :::tip

>     Since the astro config file does not support environment variables. Use the `loadEnv` function from Vite to load the environment variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the Astro config file does not normally support environment variables, use the `loadEnv` function from Vite to load them.
```
